Get ready to be informed and inspired
without the typical cliches.
There's not a wasted word in this interview
with a man who struck out into the world at age 14
after being told he would never be able to
read or retain knowledge.
Well, after studying more than 200 different -ologies
and beyond, he put his genius into action.
Today he spends 300 days a year delighting people
with his wisdom as a lecturer, teacher, and consultant,
and applying universal principles to building
sustainable lives in relationship, finance, and more.
(upbeat music)
A big issue in, certainly in the progressive,
I guess you could say, spiritual community,
has to do with money.
People have oftentimes made their money
then they decide they want to take
another heart-inspired direction in life,
and suddenly don't know how to make that happen anymore,
or think that there's something incongruous
about feeling fulfilled and making money.
You say not, in fact, I love the title of this book,
How to Make One Hell of a Profit and Still Get to Heaven.
So what is it in us that creates that conflict so often?
Well, that's a great question.
I'm not sure, with absolute certainty
if it's not religious origin,
because there is a belief out there that it's,
you know, more blessed to give than to receive,
and the impoverished is somehow more spiritual
in some aspects of religious writings.
But I always say when you go and visit the Vatican
there's a little bit of wealth there. (chuckles)
More than a little.
And I always say when if it's more blessed
to give than to receive,
then the people who are receiving,
I don't know if they're cursed, or what the deal is there.
But I really believe that fair exchange,
and I emphasize that in my book,
that fair exchange is the one
that allows us to remain present.
Now see, I was blessed to come across
what I consider one of the greatest writings
ever created on wealth building,
and it was called the Book of Wealth.
Who wrote that?
Hubert Howe Bancroft, in about 1896.
It's a 10-volume set, and it's an extraordinary set,
and I have one in my possession now,
and it's a great masterpiece,
and what they did is they explored the history
of the greatest, most empowering,
inspirational temples, religious organizations,
institutions, and individuals,
all the way back to Sumeria, Chaldea,
Egypt, all the way 'til today.
So they've gone through and looked at
what was wealth building, all the way
for the last 5,000 or plus, 6,000 years, or whatever.
And it showed that really,
in contradiction to the idea that spiritual
and material are somehow separate,
it showed very clearly that the people
who actually gave the most contribution to society
and helped build culture
had integrated those and brought those together.
So our spiritual, it's kind of like a statement
that comes from those ancient times,
that spirit without matter is expressionless,
and matter without spirit is motionless,
and they're inseparable.
Albert Einstein kind of reframed spirituality as energy
and he wrote in his Principles of Equivalency
that energy and matter are interconvertable
and so really to be able to manifest
and create great wealth does take spiritual focus
and the laws of spirituality.
In fact, the very word in theology on the word service
comes in economy, economics,
and in theology are all the same root.
So to be able to serve another individual
and be able to provide a value
and then reap the rewards of that
is really of theological origin.
You've done a lot of work
along this theme, with visioning for example.
But from what I'm seeing there is,
there's a disparity between visioning and creating.
And a lot of people think, okay,
I'll just, let's see.
Okay, I can see myself in my mansion,
and on a really nice vacation, and call it quits,
and that's the way to create wealth.
But that's not the way.
What is the problem here?
Well, that's part of the way. (chuckles)
There's no doubt that having a creative idea
and an envisionment of what you would love
is one of the first steps in creating things,
but also there's action steps.
And, you know, out of all the things that I've found
that tend to hinder the building of wealth
it all boils down to their hierarchy of values.
That's my observation, anyway.
In other words, imagine that there's a series of values,
a priority of values that each person has in their life,
and whatever's absolutely on the top
is where they have discipline and order,
and whatever's lower on their value list
is where there's chaos, and disorder,
and procrastination, hesitation.
And whereas we always have the time and energy
for things that are really important to us,
but the things that aren't we tend to procrastinate on.
Well, if we do not have a value on,
and appreciation for building wealth
and saving money, then the likelihood
of that ever staying with us is very, very slim.
In fact, what's interesting,
if you imagine all of a sudden having,
say, $1,000, or $10,000, or something
come to you on a monthly basis,
and it was to actually be brought into your presence
your hierarchy of values would determine
exactly what you'd do with it.
So in other words, if your highest value
was children's education, children's health,
children's home, vacation,
nice furniture, and things of this nature,
and number 20 was saving money and building wealth
then as the money comes in it will immediately
be dispersed according to what your values are.
And so if saving money is so low on the values
you will always have more month at the end of the money
than more money at the end of the month.
So what'll happen is just,
it's not really how much you make,
it's how you manage what you make,
and the hierarchy of your values
determine how you manage it.
So I know people that've literally,
in fact, I worked with a doctor
who made $6 million in one year.
That's a lot of money,
and at the end of the year he had to borrow
$327,000 to pay his taxes.
Now you'd think, well, how can you get
$6 million dollars and have to
borrow money to pay taxes?
But what he had is he had a very high taste
on art, and parties, and fancy cars,
and beautiful homes, and what he did
is those were higher in his values
than actually saving money and paying taxes.
So what happened is, after he did all the spending
on all the things that he wanted,
he still forgot to pay his taxes and save his money
so he was in debt.
So it really doesn't matter how much you make.
In fact, what's interesting is that very same gentleman
had an assistant working for him
that was making $2,000 a month,
but she had a different set of values
and she was saving $400 of that every month,
and she was actually closer
to financial independence than he was.
Not because of the income,
but because of the values they were holding.
So out of all the things that I've observed
the hierarchy of one's values
dictates their financial destiny,
and can determine, regardless of how much income they have,
whether they'll ever have financial independence.
And you know what's interesting too,
in America people save a very small percentage.
I mean, it's maybe one, two, or three percent,
and what's quite amazing is
the only way they save in their life
is their mortgage and their pension,
and it wasn't because of them,
it was because the mortgage company forced them
to save and build equity in their home,
and because the pension was done automatically.
In other words, if it was up to them
it would actually be below, it would be in debt,
and the average person would be in debt.
So if it wasn't for forced savings by those two mechanisms,
the majority of people in America
would actually be in financial destitution.
So that's important to have sort of a value on it,
and force system on it.
That's very important.
I have a lot of artist friends,
and a lot of them will say,
"Oh, spirit will take care of me."
Well, and you do deal a lot with your inner voice,
with going to the inner voice,
with allowing it to be your guidance.
But from a really practical viewpoint,
how do you marry these two elements
of spirit and practicality?
Well, I like to think the spirit is the inner voice
and inner vision, or the calling if you will,
that calls you to a cause, a service to bring to this world.
I would say everybody who has a mission has a message,
and everyone who has a mission and a message has a service.
So that's our spiritual quest,
to call us to do something to this world
and contribute to the world.
And then the other side is the willingness to receive.
So we have the ability to give,
but we also have the ability to receive,
and we need that side too, to be able to manifest,
because if we are not willing to receive,
we stop our willingness to give.
And I know, I've seen the same thing.
I've seen people who, you know,
are kind of chanting, and sitting there
with their white, or purple or something,
which is great, i love the colors.
Then they'll say, well somehow it'll always provide,
but I find the people that do that,
in some cases they have that result,
but it's usually because they're associated with somebody
that's got the cash flow. (laughing)
But what my experience is, if they don't value it for them
it passes right through their hands.
Money automatically passes through people
who devalue it to the hands of people who value it.
It's kind of like a relationship.
If you don't appreciate your relationship
it goes somewhere else, to somewhere who does.
If you don't appreciate your clients,
it goes to somebody who does.
And if you don't appreciate the purpose of economics
and wealth, it goes right to the people who do.
So having a spiritual mission,
and having something that's inspiring is essential,
and what's even more interesting and inspiring,
if you have zero dollars and you add a dollar,
you make your first dollar,
the value of that dollar is 100%.
If you have $100 and you add a dollar
the value is 1%.
If you have, you know, $1,000, it's .1%,
and $10,000, .01.
And as you accumulate more money
the value of the additional dollar goes down,
so there's a depreciation of that dollar.
In other words, if you have zero money
you wouldn't even consider, you know,
blowing your nose with a dollar,
but if you have a million dollars,
you're gonna blow your nose with it.
You know, you wouldn't think about it 'cause it's devalued.
Now, if we want to grow our wealth,
if we don't have a spiritual calling,
or some spiritual cause,
or something we can dedicate our lives to
that requires money to grow
inversely to the devaluation of the dollar,
then what happens, we plateau our wealth.
So we have a responsibility,
which is a spiritual component,
to continually be humbled, to go inside,
to ask what is our mission, and our calling,
and consistently grow that cause
to draw into us more income,
or otherwise we'll plateau and stagnate.
So the spirit and matter are together,
inseparable again, and this is why
I think that the separation that,
and the reason I wrote the book,
is to try to reintegrate that,
because people who have spiritual callings
are the people that actually require the wealth
in order to fulfill those great callings.
And doing what you love
is a point that you really hit heavily on
when you're working with people.
So doing what you love is the first half of it,
but often, again, these are the same people
that're often lost in doing what they love,
and, oh, I forgot to make money last year.
Well, they have the heaven force,
but the don't have the earth force.
They've gotta ground themselves
and make sure that they invest in themselves.
When I first started speaking, it was quite funny,
I did it in my apartment and I put a little bowl out,
little love donation, kind of like a church,
and I had about 15, 20 people there
and at the end of it, five dollars was in there,
and I guess nobody loved me. (both chuckle)
So it was interesting.
The next week i said that's not working,
so I put in there a little sign,
"Minimum love donation, five dollars."
And I got, I think, three five dollar bills
at the end of that, and I thought,
well that's a little better.
And I was trying to pay my rent,
I was going, this isn't working.
So I said minimum love donation $10,
and that still brought maybe $20 to $30,
and I said minimum donation $20,
and what's interesting is when I got to $20
I had about $40, and I finally got kind of frustrated
I said no, minimum fee, $20,
and 80% of the people put $20 in there.
And I thought, what is going on here?
And I realized a great law, until you value yourself
don't expect anybody else to.
Until you invest in yourself, don't expect anybody else to.
Until you pay yourself first don't expect
to attract people that will value you to pay you first.
And I realized the law of reflection,
which is a spiritual law.
So the universe is actually doing everything it can
to try to encourage you to be magnificent
and to honor yourself, and value yourself.
And so I think it's important
to be able to do that, to say it.
So, going back just a little bit
from there to our hierarchy of values.
When you start working with a person,
or a group, or a client,
is that the place you begin then
is to first determine what your hierarchy of values is?
I mean, I'm going to get to, kind of like, okay,
I agree with everything you've said,
so one, two, three, now, what do we do?
Well, when I'm working with somebody,
if they're saying, well, you know, I'd like to have wealth,
I explain to them that everyone has wealth already
but the wealth is always in the form
of what the top values are in their life.
For instance, if a woman has her children at number one,
top value, then what will happen is that's her wealth.
That's what she considers her most precious things,
and you would have to pay her a huge sum of money
to be able to borrow that commodity.
And what's interesting is, if a person is sports oriented
then that's their wealth, keeping their body fit,
and if somebody's business oriented,
that's their wealth.
The person's wealth is always in the hierarchy
of their values, the top few of their values.
That's why it's not that we're not abundant,
it's just that we've not put it into cash flow,
and I'm not saying you have to rent your kids out
(both laughing) to get converted back into cash,
but if you don't, if you don't somehow value cash
and value, you know, having actual money saved
then what'll happen then is it'll always be in that form,
which is great.
I know people who are very spiritually awakened,
and what they do, they have the highest value
on social and spiritual causes.
So what happens is their retirement plan
is not their own cash, their retirement plan
is when they're 60 and 70 years old
the church takes care of them.
So that is what their investment was,
and there's nothing wrong with any form
of wealth that's that way,
'cause wealth means wellbeing.
But the bottom line is, the versatility of cash,
the versatility of having, saving money
allows you exchange, fairly exchange,
with other people from one service to another
with the most variety.
In other words, if I'm bartering with you
then what talent you have is all
I'm able to exchange with,
and if I don't need that talent it's hard to exchange.
But with money the value and the purpose of money
was designed to create a more variety,
and more options of how to exchange
so you could have more fair exchange.
And the original forms of money were cattle, cows.
And imagine if I don't need a cow,
and I need to do a service, and I need to get paid
and they're gonna give me a cow and I don't need it,
well I gotta have a butcher to break it up
to make eating out of it.
So what happens is it's moved from cows
to coins, to cash, to plastic,
to electronics, to now light.
And that's spiritual.
What do you
mean when you say light?
Well that's the form that now
money is exchanged around the world
at the speed of light, instantaneously.
So it's extremely efficient, and it makes us present.
So in a sense, materiality in the form of money
has become spirituality.
It's instantaneous presence, and fair exchange
from one service to another.
So let's look at it
in reverse for a moment,
and the subject of people who have
vast amounts of money,
and one wise man we interviewed said,
who deals with a lot of this said,
the people that have
far more than their future generations
can even begin to utilize
often have a big hole in the spirit.
So it's not as though they've integrated
the spiritual into their ability to make money,
but rather allowed that to be
their cause in and of itself.
What happens when this occurs?
Well, you know, it's interesting.
I've been asked that question before,
and I find there are definite people
who have very little money, if anything,
they're in poverty, and people that have vast fortunes
that do not identify themselves spiritually,
but I also know a multi-billionaire in New York City
who's dedicated his whole life
to the Tibetan Foundation, for instance.
And so I know people with vast fortunes,
their whole life is about metaphysics and spirituality,
so I've seen both sides of that.
So I don't know if it's because of the money
or it's just their selection of values in their life.
I wouldn't say that money makes that happen,
that people have that as a value.
Now it's been my experience this,
and this is probably gonna be a little challenging here,
but I always say where is spirit not?
And I'm gonna use the word God here for a moment
because God to me is like the grand organized designer,
G-O-D, or the grand organized design
if you don't want to personify it,
and I like to think of it as where is it not.
Where is God not, or where is love not?
We tend to want to think that, well,
spirituality is this meditation,
or spirituality is this prayer,
or spirituality is this temple.
But to the mother who's raising a child
their spirituality is that daily dedication to the child,
and hugging that child with their heart open.
A person who's dedicated to sports,
their spirituality is the prayer that they say
when they're about to go on that field
and do that performance that's absolutely mind boggling.
Or the person who's maybe building an architectural design,
their heart and their dream is putting it into
a piece of art that shows for maybe the next century.
So spirituality is not necessarily limited to a box,
it's everything, and I always like to think
that's it's omnipresent, and to box it in
and say that person's spiritual
and this person isn't, I think, is a misnomer.
Because what happens is we project our values
onto people, and if it doesn't match our version
of spirituality we think they're not spiritual,
and if it doesn't support our values
we think they have a hole in their heart.
But actually, if you get to meet those individuals
and get to know them as who they are
they have something that inspires them
that they dedicate their lives to.
Whatever it may be is their spiritual path.
So I like to think of it--
What if it's fear?
Well, if there's fear running their life
their heart is closed, but obviously,
they don't live day in and day out,
every day, all day, in their fear.
I mean, when I get to know people,
when I actually get to meet them,
my first impression sometime is shattered,
and I find out that they're loving individuals
to something, to somebody, somewhere,
and what that is their spiritual, their connection.
So going down that same path
then healing some of the gaps
between cultures and peoples
and individuals,
from what I'm hearing you say
it doesn't matter how high you go in the hierarchy,
socioeconomically, that you generally find
that the love is there, at some level.
How do we crack that open
so that resources, for example,
flow more easily between all of the people?
Well, there's two types of financial people
I like to think of.
You have the financial managers
who're attempting to help people build wealth,
and then you have the economists
helping people redistribute wealth.
So what happens is, that the people who're
trying to build the wealth are trying to create
the have and the have-nots, you might say.
And the people that value it end up the haves
and the people that devalue it end up the have-nots.
But what happens is, if that becomes extreme
the entire economy gets, it creates a revolution
if you will, it creates instability.
So the economists come in there and try
to redistribute the wealth through taxations
or philanthropic aspects, or something,
and it is essential to stabilize a government
and stabilize a culture to have that redistribution,
the Robin Hood effect.
It's absolutely essential,
and usually when people continue to gain great wealth
sooner or later nature gives them challenges,
or tragedies, or humbling circumstances.
There's extractions to force them to be
philanthropic, to redistribute for
the people who may not have.
But in either case, and this is happening in South Africa,
I'm actually involved in it, but what happens is
is as long as the people do not value wealth,
even if you redistribute it, it will be redistributed back,
'cause money always flows to where
it's valued and appreciated, and studied,
and understood, and have certainty the most.
So it's automatically redistributed again
because if the people do not value it
it's gonna go right through their hands
into the people who do, that's how life is.
Well that's very elegantly simple,
and it's the first time I've really heard
anybody put it that way.
Well I've had some interesting things,
I've watched doctors that I've worked with,
I consult with a lot of doctors,
and I watch the people, their personalities,
and their habits, and I look at their values.
And the doctor will say, well, you know,
why is it that this person's got this
very successful and big practice
and makes lots of money and I don't?
And I'm gonna use one example, a story.
This doctor comes to me and he says,
"I want you to help me become successful."
And I said fantastic.
I said, "So where are you successful?"
And he said, "Well, I'm not successful,
"I want you to help me become successful."
And I said, "So where are you successful?"
He says, "Dr. Demartini, you're not hearing me.
"I'm not, I want to be."
I said, "You're not listening,
"I'm asking, where are you successful?"
He looked at me and he paused for a moment
and he says, "Well, I guess I have a successful
"relationship with my wife.
"We've been together for a decade now,
"we have a great relationship, and it's really rewarding."
And I said, "Fantastic, now where else
"do you have success in your life?"
He says, "Well, I guess I have a great
"relationship with my son.
"He's in baseball and I'm playing the coach this year.
"We may win the Pennant."
"And where else are you successful?"
And he says, "Well, I guess, we're all working in the yard
"and we've planted flowers, and we may get
"yard of the month this month."
I said, "Where else are you successful?"
He says, "Well, my mother-in-law lives with us,
"and we really get along, and so many people
"don't get along with their mother-in-law.
"We have this great relationship,
"and that's sort of successful."
I said, "Where else?"
And he says, "Well, on Sundays and on Wednesdays
"I do lay ministry, I'm kind of a lay minister
"and I get to teach at my church,
"and that was one of my goals in life."
I said, "Can you see that you have successes?"
And he goes, "Well now that you ask that, yes,
"But I don't have that big house,
"I don't have that big money,
"and I don't have the fancy cars."
And I said, "I have a question.
"That gentlemen, you must be comparing it to somebody.
"Who're you comparing yourself to?"
"Well, that Dr. up on the hill who's got all that money."
I said, "How is his relationship with his wife?"
"Well, yeah, they're having some challenges."
"And what about his son?"
"Uh, yeah, he's on drugs."
"And what about the yard?
"Are they into the yard?"
He says, "No, I think they have keepers of the yard,
"I don't think they even notice it."
"And what about their mother in law?"
"Oh yeah, they moved out of the state to get away from her."
"And what about their church interaction?"
"I don't think they go to church"
I said, "Would you trade what he has
"for everything he has in order to have that?"
He says, "Absolutely not."
I said, "Well, can you see that your hierarchy of values
"have led you to your form of success,
"and his hierarchy of values have led up to his.
"You don't have any less success,
"you just have a different form.
And one of the messages that I want people to know
is that everybody has success according to their values,
but they may be comparing themselves to other people
and not honoring their magnificence.
And when they understand their magnificence
they know that if they would like to turn it into cash
that will require a change in values,
but there'll be a price.
So having that change of values and appreciating money
will have a new set of pains and pleasures in their life.
It's not going to be necessarily better or worse,
but it'll be a different set,
and your success will change form.
But the value that money has is
it allows more options in life,
and allows you to, if you are sad,
at least you'll be dressed nicely when you're sad.
(laughing) And you'll be able
to go to a nice restaurant.
A nice restaurant, but you know it is interesting,
and this is true, there is a statistic that shows
that people that do learn how to save their money
they do end up living longer, overall.
And I say that to this--
Is that because of a reduction
in the sheer anxiety, we've got a truck
with us here, but that's okay.
Yes, but it's the anxiety, and it's also
better quality lifestyle, less stress,
better healthcare, everything.
What's interesting is the very people,
I was speaking at a church one time,
and I speak at churches a lot,
and this church, this lady came up to me,
and she says, "You know, I'm not greedy."
And I said, "And how do you say that?"
She says, "Well, I'm not in it for the money."
And I said, "Oh," I said, "money's bad."
And I said, "Oh, is that the reason
"that you're at my financial seminar here at the church?"
(Blonde woman laughs)
And she says "Oh" and she just walked off.
And i watched these, I guess, preprogrammed
belief systems that are injected into people
and it's self sabotaging because that woman
with that belief system is never gonna do it
'cause she'll feel guilty and bad
if she ever does have any money.
But what's interesting is the people who say
I'm not in it for the money are the ones
that will work their whole life for money
because they never learn to save.
And so they'll work their whole life as a slave for money
and money will be the thing that they'll have to depend on.
But the person who learns how to save,
and values money, will eventually have
money working for them.
They are its master, they are not its slave.
And so saving money is actually a spiritual quest
because what it does, it allows you to
not have it run your life, but to direct it
with your intentions and your spiritual calling,
and the people that're in destitution
are having to work every day to try to get by,
and their focus is the money.
So it's sort of paradoxical.
It is very much, yes--
And I try to teach people to integrate those,
to have a spiritual calling, a spiritual mission,
and have a material understanding
so you can integrate the two,
because how are you going to create
in the material world with your spiritual vision
if you don't know the laws that govern it?
So I guess to get down
to the ABCs one, two, threes, and all that,
it's best because we only have so much time here
for people to pick up a copy of the book,
which of course we'll remind them about on the website too.
And is there anything else you'd like to add
to the subject right now of material wealth
before we get onto I Gave Up On Happiness?
(both laugh) Thought we'd do a two-for here.
You know, if people will wait,
most people are waiting for the big kill
before they save,
and my experience is it's not how much you save
it's the habit of saving.
If they will just take their piggy banks
and stay with the savings process
the piggy banks will become biggie banks.
And you know when I first started saving
I saved a very small amount,
and every quarter, every three months
after I got the habit of saving what i was saving
I just increased it between one and 10%.
And little by little I noticed that as I started to save
I attracted more opportunities,
more business, more service,
more people wanted to interact with me.
It's quite interesting, when you have a dollar saved
you hang out with dollar-aires.
When you have a thousand dollars saved
you hang out with thousand-aires.
If you have a million dollars saved
you hang out with millionaires.
When you start to save you get to hang out
with people that have broader influence
and so now your spiritual calling
can now reach more people.
And so the value is just to save,
and I think that's the message
of spirituality anyway, is to be saved in that respect.
So I think maybe that's the reminder,
and every time you open a computer,
and before you close it down, you've got to learn to
save.
Save.
So if there's any message I want to bring to people
when it comes to economics is,
no matter how much money you make
save a portion of it.
If you can save 10%,
you have financial independence in your reach.
But if you don't, you're probably gonna be
dependent on somebody else in your life,
and nobody dreams about that.
Well what you're saying is almost
anti-American, they're saying spend, spend, spend,
in fact, do it on credit.
Well, when everybody is spending,
the wise person's saving,
and then when everybody is now destitute and has to save
then that person is able to spend.
Yeah, and what is your comment on this?
I mean the credit industry?
By the time, you haven't even graduated from college
the come-ons are coming in by the day.
Well, I'd like to say something about that
because if you allow yourself to get into debt
to start a business, to reap the rewards of that
then that's understandable.
But if you're in debt, make sure you take
the amount of debt that you're paying every month
and break it down per week,
the amount it would be a week,
break it down to what it would be per day,
break it down even to hour.
And then convert whatever that debt is per hour
into units of service, or products that you sell,
and then focus on service.
Because if you focus on converting that to service
and focus on serving people the debt will disappear.
But if you focus on your debt out of anxiety
the service will disappear.
People can tell when your focus is on the finances
and not the service to them.
When you are present, and spiritually present
and you're certain about your service with other people
and you serve them,
the money takes care of itself that way.
Well, thank you for that.
That's, I mean there's, I'll go back
and watch this one myself.
A lot of gems in there.
And along that line, you mentioned a little bit ago,
it's our hierarchy of values
are very different from each other.
For some people it's family, or art,
or whatnot, and for other people
it may be more financial security oriented.
And I like this book, the working title you have,
or is this the finished title,
I Gave Up On Happiness, It Made Me Too Sad (both laugh)
That's coming out shortly.
Yes, I have
a seminar that I do on that topic,
and it draws attention.
It does draw attention.
So it sounds like it's a country western song, first of all.
I Gave Up On Happiness, It Made Me Too Sad.
Maybe if you read my book in reverse
you'll get all kinds of relationships. (Blonde woman laughs)
So what is this all about?
Well, the reason that title, I mean,
It's kind of, it's thought provoking,
but i watch, and I consult people, and counsel people,
and I watch a lot of people, in relationships particularly,
or in any area of their life, they're searching
for this kind of a pie-in-the-sky fantasy.
I define a fantasy as a pleasure without a pain
and a nightmare a pain without a pleasure,
and they're looking in life for a pleasure without a pain,
a happy without a sad, a nice without a mean,
a kind without a cruel, a support without a challenge.
You know, kind of a calm without turmoil,
and they're looking for a one-sided magnet,
and I like to think that everything an event.
In quantum physics everything is an event of neutral
until we project our values and measure it
as one or the other, positive or negative.
And what happens is every event
has a pair of opposites,
so if we think it's gonna be supportive
there's also a hidden challenge.
We may not see it at first, we may be infatuated
and elated, but then we eventually discover
what the challenge was.
And we may think this is a terrible thing and a challenge,
but we eventually discover out
the terrifics and benefits out of it.
So nature has a pair of opposites,
so any time we're searching
for one-sided magnets it's futile.
Now this would get into
relationships right quick, right?
Yes, because what happens is
it's like trying to find a monopole,
a one-sided pole of a magnet.
You can cut the magnet in half
and try to get the positive pole,
but you then get two magnets
with positive, negatives.
And this is the futility that people are searching for.
They're setting themselves up for fantasies,
and the fantasy is the source of their broken hearts.
Their fantasies are the source of their depressions
and bipolar conditions, and later post-traumatic conditions,
'cause they have this expectation that is unrealistic
and they set themselves up for the defeat.
And I'm trying, in my book and in my seminar on this,
I'm trying to make sure that people
set reasonable goals that match their values
that are something that're obtainable
so they don't set themselves up defeat,
so they practice themselves honoring their accomplishments.
So how does this filter down
into relationships, and let's say specifically
intimate relationships between people.
I mean, you've already alluded to it, to an extent, but.
Well, every individual, as you know
has a set of values, and so if you ever expect them
to live anything else but their values
you set yourself up for a fantasy,
and this happens in every relationship
just about I see.
People are sitting there, getting into a relationship.
They both had a set of values,
whatever's most important on them
they try to get the other person to do.
This person over here tries to get them to do,
and by the way if any two people are exactly the same,
one's not necessary.
So what they do is they spend their lives
trying to fix the other person,
and they think that the person has potential.
Whenever you hear somebody say,
"Well, oh, this guy's got potential.
"This person's got potential."
What that means is that I'm dedicated
to changing them into my value systems
and the potential is the difference between
them, as they are, and the difference
of what I expect from them.
And this is doomed, this is automatically,
because people just want to be loved
for who they are, not for what you expect from them.
So you have to start in a relationship
right off the bat knowing that the only thing
you're going to expect from that individual
is for them to live their values.
Unless you learn the art of caring,
which is the art of communicating
what's important to you, what's highest important to you
in terms of what's most important to them.
And it's like a sales process, if you--
Give a good example of this.
Okay, let me give you a story and example.
Okay, let's say I'm with a wife and husband,
and I'll use my own example,
'cause I was previously married with Athena,
who has passed away now.
But what happened is I was getting ready
to go on a tour for a month,
traveling in a number of countries
in Africa, and Asia and things,
and I said to Athena, I said,
"Well, I'm about to go on my tour."
And if I was to go up to her and say, well, high five,
see you later babe, I'll call you if I get a chance,
you know, I'll see you when,
she would be not there when I got back.
But if I go up to her and I say,
"Look, I'm going back on my tour again."
I put arms, and I hold her,
and I said, "I'll be thinking about you every day,
"and I love you, and I was just wondering,
"I noticed that next month when I'm
"actually finishing my tour that it's full moon,
"and I was just wondering if there's any way
"you could meet me in Venice.
"'Cause what I imagine is going down the Grand Ganal
"underneath the Rialto, holding arms with a blanket,
"in the gondola and just going
"and being together on the full moon.
"And then turning left down one of the canals,
"and helping you off the gondola onto the steps,
"and then walking through the nice walkways,
"and seeing Gucci, and seeing Versace,
"and seeing all the brands as we go into San Marco's Square,
" and we listen to the violins in concert."
Well hello, what did she say? (laughs)
I'd imagine that, and then what I'd do
is listen to that have and have a cappuccino and Perrier,
and then going to the Europa & Regina Hotel
and having a massage, a male for you,
and female for me, and getting all oiled up
and then make passionate love and then maybe
a shower together, and the next morning go shopping.
And I was just wondering if there was any way
you could meet me in Venice, honey?
(Blonde woman giggles)
And she'll say, "I thank you for working so hard.
"I love you honey, I'll make all the arrangements.
"I'll see you there."
If I'm communicating in her values
I can go, I have my freedom
to go and do what I love to do,
to travel and to speak,
and then have a very romantic rendezvous.
But if I don't, then what happens is
I'm getting friction in the relationship
because I'm projecting my values onto her
instead of honoring hers.
So how does that kind of conversation
generally go between an average couple.
Well, an average couple, because they're
ignorant of the other person,
and they're careless about the other person
they expect their values to be met
and they project those onto another person,
and the other person is doing the same
and so they have alternating monologues, not dialogues.
And what they do is they fight,
and they're constantly trying to change
and they have these, they keep, see, Microsoft,
and the computer industry does not have a memory system,
or Intel does not have a memory system
as effective as a man and woman's remembrance
of everything that went against their values.
And they will download that the second they get
their buttons pushed strong enough
as a capacitor discharging energy,
they'll download every memory that they
have not been feeling supported by.
So what happens is they just store up all this tension
and all this anger of their values not being met
because they have false expectations.
And this is what my book is about,
and the seminar's about,
making sure that you only set up your expectations
around other people according
to what their true values are,
because otherwise you have betrayal.
And see, the person's never really committed to you,
I know that sounds kind of challenging.
They're only committed to their values,
and if you understand that, and realize
that you're always in competition with
other people in the marketplace,
and if you can communicate in their values
more effective than anybody else
they stay with you for a lifetime.
But if you don't, somebody else
may come along with a better mousetrap,
and they go off with somebody else.
Yeah, because the subject of betrayal,
as you just mentioned, is often really
what you've set up in your own mind.
You may feel betrayed, when in fact
that person has just adhered to their own--
They're just being themselves.
People just want to be loved for who they are,
and if you're not able to do it,
and you keep wanting to change them
and keep having false expectations,
they're looking for somebody who'll love them.
What about the other issue
where you're not necessarily trying to,
say, change the other person,
but instead you're romanticizing,
or over inflating a person's value system.
Now the other side, which is called
the fantasy, or the putting them on a pedestal,
whoever you put on a pedestal, over time
you will end up putting in the pit.
Because the very person you put on a pedestal
you will sacrifice your life doing it,
with that infatuation, and eventually resent
not doing the things you really
love to do for your own life.
And eventually you'll resent that
and destroy the relationship.
So if you put people on pedestals you'll put them in pits,
and the secret is neither one,
but to put them in your heart.
And so I would say, it's interesting,
in studying dynamics of relationships,
the person who's the underdog,
who's got the infatuation for the overdog
is the person who wants to tie the person down.
That's where it originates, the term tying down.
And they're the ones that want the monogamy,
and they want the constraint,
and they're the ones who're jealous,
and they're the ones that want to call,
and run that person's life, and make sure
they're not away from them.
The person who's the overdog, who's the confident one,
who has empowerment is wanting their freedom,
and they're the ones who want to let loose
and not be tied down.
So if a person is wanting to get married to somebody
and they have somebody they've got on this pedestal,
the best thing they can do is empower their life.
Go strengthen all seven areas of life,
their spiritual, their mental, their career,
their financial, their family,
their social, their physical.
To become such a package that no man would want to leave.
I have to share this story, it's a good story.
I was in Calgary, and I was doing
a relationships program there
and there was a lovely lady there
that put her hand up, and she was with her boyfriend,
and she says, "What do you do with a man who can't commit?"
And I said, "Well, you go and empower yourself
"because you obviously aren't a package
"that he's ready to invest in."
And she just kind of huffed a bit,
and I walked over to her and I said,
"So what do you have to offer this man?"
And I confronted her, because she was being cocky,
and of course when you're cocky,
you get challenged.
So I said to her, "So are you some sort of
"spiritual goddess, and have great spiritual radiance,
"and some illumination, and great spiritual
"wisdom that you're offering him?"
She goes, "Well, no.
"No, not really."
And I said, "Are you some sort of a mental genius,
"and I giant there, and do you have some
"mental capacities, a Harvard MBA,
"or some degree in some form,
"amazing intuition?"
"No, I dropped out of college."
I said, "Do you have a career success,
"that's got this big multi-national company
"or something that you're offering this gentleman?"
"No, I work as an assistant."
I said, "Do you have vast fortune,
"and a great dowry, and you have wealth
"and everything else, and he's gonna want
"to maybe take advantage of?"
"No, I'm in debt.
"Alright, do you have some sort of family stability,
"and are you just a very stable, and very connected
"woman in the family dynamics?"
And she says, "Well no, I've been through two divorces."
I said, "Are you socially connected,
"and you've made a network that he would
"definitely benefit in his life from?"
"No, I live in a small town."
"Are you the most beautiful, and sexy woman
"that's basically hot to trot and he can't just be without."
"Well, I think we do okay."
I said, "Can you see your self-image of yourself,
"it's somewhat deflated."
And she goes, "Yeah."
And I said, "Well that's why he's treating you
"the way you are, 'cause the way you're treating yourself
"is the way he's gonna treat you.
And I said, "Come with me, 'cause this is not the true you,
"this is the you you've developed
"about yourself, believed about yourself."
So I took her over there and I did the Demartini method,
which is a method of asking quality questions
to extract out of a person a quality life.
And what was amazing is we sat down and said
where is your spiritual radiance, where is is?
What form is it in?
It's not missing.
You may be comparing yourself to other people's form
and minimizing yourself, but where is yours?
And we woke up her spiritual awareness
to where her spiritual power was.
We did that all the way around the wheel,
all seven areas of her life.
We sat and asked, where do you have business savvy,
where do you have intelligence,
where do you have power in your family?
And we woke it up to a point,
after two and a half hours of working with her
and people watching, where she goes,
"You know, maybe I better not rush this thing."
I said, "Can you see it right now
"that you're honoring yourself,
"and realizing that maybe you're infatuated,
"and infatuation is blind, and love sees true,
"and maybe now you're seeing both sides."
Well the second she did that it was about time for lunch.
She went back over to him, they walked off together,
and he was doing the same method on her,
just looking at that benefits she had to offer him.
They went off to lunch, and during that hour at lunch
I came back from lunch and there was about
seven or eight women around her
and I walked over there and I said,
"What's goin' on over there?"
She held up a $28,000 diamond right.
(Blonde woman laughs)
Because, I went over there and asked him.
The men were as far away from there as possible
'cause they didn't want their girlfriends
or wives seeing this,
but the women were all gathered around
because they're drawn to the diamonds.
But I went over there and asked him
what is it that made you do that?
And he says, "Well, while you were working with her
"there was some sort of quantum energetic field
"that was changing, and I felt like, oh my God,
"if he talks to her, she may leave,
"and all of a sudden I realized how valuable she was,
"and I realized that this is the person for me."
And I said, 'cause it's kind of like the flee they follow,
follow they flee?
If you're desperate to get them they don't want you
'cause you're devaluing yourself,
but if you stand strong you're more likely
to have somebody that's empowered in your life.
So that was a perfect demonstration of honoring herself,
and acknowledging her magnificence and radiance,
and the result that comes from that.
And it wasn't an exaggeration of self,
it was just an honoring of one's self,
and that makes relationships bloom.
And to get to that point we
need to have a very clear communication
with our deepest form of intelligent spirit.
Everybody calls it something different.
You call it the inner voice, is that correct?
The inner voice, inner vision,
the inner source, you can give many names.
And it really doesn't
matter what the name is,
but our very highest potential, our essence.
Yes.
And so, where does one begin that journey
if they're not already clear on it.
Well, I would say the quality of our life's
based on the quality of the questions we ask.
And we ask the most profound questions
when we're in a state of gratitude.
So what I ask people to do on a daily basis,
and I was asked this when I was four by my mother,
to count your blessings.
One of my earlier books was called
Count Your Blessings for that reason,
and what you do is you sit down,
okay, 'cause if you're not grateful for something
you stop yourself from having
more things to be grateful for.
But once you start in motion,
and think about what you are grateful for
you attract opportunities that become
even more grateful.
So what you do is you think about
what you're grateful for, and you make a list in your mind,
and you do it, and don't stop
until you get a tear of gratitude,
an inspirational tear.
Then what happens is you go inside
in a moment of silence, and a moment of presence,
and you ask yourself, alright, what's my guidance?
Because in, gratitude is the key
that opens up the gateway of the heart,
and allows love that's there, waiting to come out,
the light and love of the heart.
And when that comes out from that gratitude
the mind becomes crystal clear, and you have inspiration,
and the body becomes enthusiastic.
And in that you have the greatest creativity,
the greatest inspirations, and the greatest guidance.
The inner voice and inner vision is able
to guide at that time, and that is empowering.
And what now happens is if you then
ask questions like, alright inner voice,
what's next, what's my mission,
what's my vision, what am I here to do,
what am I dedicated to?
You get pure answer, and I do that daily.
I literally have books and volumes of communication
inwardly with myself, and that has guided my life
and that's one of the most profound things
I've learned to do in life.
There was a book that was called Cosmic Consciousness
by Richard M. Bucke, that came out in 19,
yeah 1901 I think,
and it was written, and what it was
is a study of the 43 most illuminated people in history,
and what was the common threads of these great illuminates.
And from Christ, and the Buddha,
to Walt Whitman, to the great inspired poets and writers,
and they found one common thread,
that they all trusted their inner voice
and they all listened and dialoged with it on a daily basis.
And so in my observation, even CEOs of companies,
great leaders, when you get down, that's what they do.
And so I trust that, and I use it on a daily basis,
and I know if a person does that,
goes into a state of gratitude, goes inside,
asks questions to the inner voice
and writes the guidance down,
when the voice and vision on the inside
is more profound than all opinions on the outside you've
begun to master your life.
That's the key,
I was just going to ask next
when that voice is the one--
When we haven't learned to do that
the outer directedness runs our life
and we subordinate ourselves to other people
which allows us to minimize
our radiance, and our shine,
and our magnificence, and keeps us
from standing strong as a leader,
which is our destiny.
And what you talked about a moment ago
about feeling the gratitude until
a little tear forms is really key.
I think this is the missing part in a lot of people's
version of visioning is to create a picture in your head
and then think that's enough,
when in fact emotions, feelings,
do serve a purpose in the process of creation.
Can you talk about that just a little bit more?
You've already touched on it a few times,
but maybe directly.
Well I say that feelings penetrate through barriers
that no thoughts alone can travel,
so when you take a thought plus a feeling it has impact,
but there's different types of feelings.
And I'm gonna give something that's
maybe a little different here.
I say that you have emotional feelings,
which are polarized, happy, sad,
and then there's synthesized feelings,
which is gratitude, and love,
and inspiration, and enthusiasm,
which are poised, and present,
and balanced feelings, and there's a difference.
Emotional feelings will make you manic, or depressed,
but love is always a synthesis of opposites.
I define love as a synthesis and synchronicity
of complementary opposites.
So, in other words, in the Breakthrough Experience
which is a program I do using the Demartini method,
I've taken literally tens of thousands of people
through a process where they completely
balance their feelings, balance out their perceptions,
and all of a sudden the tears come.
And it's not tears of sorrow, it's not tears of elation,
it's tears of grace, gratitude.
Grace is another way of saying
that human will now matches divine will,
and grace is gracias, or gratitude.
And that means that you see the order,
the implicate order of the universe
is now becoming evident.
And now you see the apparent order
beyond the chaos that you saw,
and now you're thankful for the order
and you realize there's nothing to fix,
there's nothing to change.
As long as we have the polarity of emotions
we're always wanting to change ourselves relative to others,
or change others relative to ourselves.
When we have that poised state,
there's nothing to change.
So we either have poise, or poison,
and the poise is where the grace is
and that's where we have our
spiritual bouquet awaken.
And to come full circle,
if one were to establish, or define,
their hierarchy of values from that place
then you would have a really solid platfrom
to work from.
My whole purpose of the Breakthrough Experience
is exactly that, to help people
have that experience, 'cause in that moment
that they have that, the values dissolve for a moment
'cause the values occur with positive and negative
and they're dissolved, and there's
a moment of unconditional love.
In that is where you have clarity of mission,
clarity of vision, clarity of the message,
and it's inspired and it's automatic.
It's like you're the channel now.
Now the universe and you are working together in the zone.
The second you go back into emotions and polarities again
and you minimize yourself relative to others
and subordinate yourself to them
and inject their values into your life,
or exaggerate yourself to others
and project your values onto them.
Either one of those is attempting
to make you go against your values,
or get others to go against their values
which is not an act of love.
So when we have a balanced perspective
and we see that everyone around us
is a reflection of us, and we have truly poised,
now we have the true spiritual state.
In that state, if we have a clear vision,
which occurs, and we hold that vision,
we are a creator, and we're a manifestor.
And what we do is we're inspired,
and enthusiastic to want to go and act
and take the action steps necessary,
'cause there's no procrastination in that state,
there's just loving acts.
So really, number one priority
before even saving, before your savings account,
should be having some sort of daily
moments of reflection, of gratitude,
of practice of some kind, even if it takes
only a couple of minutes.
My ritual in the morning before I leave
one dream world into this dream world,
'cause I consider this just as much a dream world.
That's right.
That transition is done in a state of gratitude,
so when that alarm goes off, if I haven't beat it up,
gotten up before it, I don't get out of bed
until I have that tear, and I start my day with it,
and I have a pad next to the bed
so I can write any inspired scribing notes there.
And I start my day that way,
then I get onto my computer and I update my mission.
I believe very strongly in having a mission statement
and having your goals and dreams laid out,
and also to every single day,
to actually type in what blessings you had that day.
I have literally hundreds of pages of blessings
that I've kept record of, because if you ever have a moment
you're not inspired you can always read that
and remind yourself of the blessings that are in your life.
So that's a daily ritual, and then,
if I get it during the day, I may miss it during the day,
but always at night when I'm transitioning
from this dream world back into the other dream world,
which one is real reality, we don't know,
but what happens is I do that again
and I try not to go to bed until I have that tear again.
And what that does, it allows you
to have a feeling of grace
in and out of this existence.
Thank you very much.
Your words are an absolute gift.
I'll be watching this interview a few times myself.
Now if you found Dr. Demartini interesting
you will likely enjoy our interview
with Dr. Vernon Woolf, who has devoted his life
to helping others connect with their
deepest inner wisdom,
which he calls our full potential selves.
Until next time, thanks for watching.